---
title: Kanto Audio Player
layout: default
category: project
---

Kanto was our group's final project for Columbia's CSEE 4840 Embedded Systems class.
It is an audio player and visualizer implemented on an Altera DE2 FPGA
development board. The player consists of a digital hardware design implemented 
in VHDL and embedded microcontroller code implemented in C. 

Kanto will read raw CD-quality audio data off of an SD card and play it on
the DE2's audio codec. It will also take groups of samples, compute the FFT,
and display the resulting frequency bins on a VGA monitor.

The hardware takes care of time-sensitive tasks like reading from the SD card,
computing the FFT, and driving the visualization.

Software controls initialization and the user interface, which is a track
menu at the top of the VGA display controlled by input from a PS/2 keyboard.

My teammates on this project were Kavita Jain-Cocks, Amrita Mazumdar,
Darien Nurse, and Jonathan Yu.

<p><iframe width="560" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/g-Gh5SFSpzw" 
		frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="true">
</iframe></p>

An early iteration of our design. There is no keyboard input at this stage.
The only control is a single switch on the board, which causes the playback to 
pause or continue. The audio starts playing from the beginning of the SD card
as soon as the compiled HDL description is flashed and cannot be restarted,
rewound, fast-forwarded, or controlled in any way other than play/pause.
This first iteration is also notable for containing no software whatsoever.
All of the control logic at this point was implemented in VHDL.

<p><iframe src="http://player.vimeo.com/video/68397395" width="500" height="281" 
	frameborder="0" allowFullScreen="true">
</iframe></p>

The final, polished version of our design, as recorded by our professor on
demo day. We changed the visualization, displaying only the first 64 frequency
bins (as that roughly corresponded to the range of human hearing), and added
software to implement a fancier UI, which allowed track selection, fast-forward,
and rewind using keyboard input. As you can see, I'm quite partial to the song
"Moanin'" by Art Blakey and the Jazz Messengers, despite having listened to it
over and over again in the lab while debugging the audio and SD card.

[Final Report](http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~sedwards/classes/2013/4840/reports/kanto.pdf)
[Code](https://github.com/kanto-player/kanto)
