---
title: Exploring the Arrow SoCKit Part II - Installing Linux
layout: default
categories: [blog, fpga]
---

In my last post, I showed you how to get a simple FPGA example working on the
Arrow SoCKit dev board. In this post, we will explore the CPU side of the
Cyclone V SoC and install a custom Linux kernel and root filesystem using
[Buildroot](http://buildroot.uclibc.org/). This tutorial will focus on booting
via SD card, so make sure you have a microSDHC card handy. If your computer
doesn't have a microSD port, you will also need a microSD - SD and possibly
an SD - USB adapter. Also, these instructions assume you are running some form
of Linux. It should be possible to do all these things on Windows or OSX as
well, but you'll have to figure that out yourself (or switch to a *real*
operating system).

[RocketBoards.org](http://rocketboards.org/foswiki/Main/WebHome) has some
articles on booting Linux on the SoCKit, but they are focused on booting
Altera's Yocto Linux distribution. If you don't feel like going through
compiling everything yourself, you can always just follow their instructions
for [booting from a pre-built image](http://rocketboards.org/foswiki/Documentation/ArrowSoCKITEvaluationBoardLinuxGettingStarted).
However, if you're a Linux nerd like me and want to get the educational benefits
of doing things the hard way, read on!

<div class="warning">
<p><span class="alert">Warning! Here there be dragons!</span> Getting Linux
running on an embedded system can be something of a dark art. One semester in
my days as an undergraduate, I took on a research project that involved booting
Android on an Arndale development board. It took two months of banging my head
against the problem before I finally gave up and asked for help on a
kernel dev mailing list. Turns out I was just using the wrong versions of the
kernel and bootloader. So what am I trying to say here? I'm saying that you
shouldn't get discouraged if things don't work and <span class="alert">for the
love of all that is holy, ask for help if you get stuck!!!!</span> Don't do
the same thing I did and try the same things over and over again. If it's
not working, there's probably some information you're missing. Go open an
issue on the <a href="https://github.com/zhemao/zhemao.github.com/issues">
Github repo for this site</a> with your question and I'll try to answer it.
If that doesn't work (and it probably won't, since I'm just figuring all of
this out as I go along), you can try asking your question on the
<a href="http://lists.rocketboards.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/">
RocketBoards.org mailing lists</a>.</p>
</div>

## Step 1 - Configuring the Board

To boot Linux from the SD Card, you will first need to set the jumpers and
switches on the board correctly. Follow the instructions on the
[RocketBoards.org](http://rocketboards.org/foswiki/Documentation/ArrowSoCKITEvaluationBoardLinuxGettingStarted#Configuring_the_Board)
article to do this.

## Step 2 - Partitioning the SD Card

To partition the SD card, use the fdisk program. Plug the SD card into your
computer and delete any existing partitions if there are any.
Then, run the command `fdisk /dev/sdX`. Replace `/dev/sdX` with whatever
device file your OS recognizes the SD card as (it'll probably be `/dev/sdb`).
This will bring you into the fdisk command prompt. Enter the following commands
(note: when I type `<enter>` it means just hit enter without entering a command).

    n
    p
    3
    2048
    +2048
    t
    a2
    n
    p
    <enter>
    <enter>
    +256M
    t
    1
    0b
    n
    p
    <enter>
    <enter>
    <enter>
    w

Once you enter "w", the partition table will be written to the SD card.

## Step 3 - Installing the bootloader

The bootloader used for embedded ARM systems is called u-boot.
Unfortunately, this is the one part that I couldn't figure out how to install
from source. There seems to be a problem with the stage 1 bootloader in the
rocketboards.org git repo. Fortunately there is a (rather hacky) way around
this. Simply extract the bootloader from the pre-built image. I've uploaded
[the bootloader image](https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/22450509/fpga-series/bootloader.img)
for you so that you don't have to go and download a 1.9 GB image in order to
extract a single megabyte from it. Once you've downloaded it, you can
write it to the SD card like so.

    sudo dd if=bootloader.img of=/dev/sdX3 bs=512
    sudo sync

Don't forget to replace the "X".

## Step 4 - Installing the kernel

Clone the sources of the kernel for the SoCKit from RocketBoards.org.

    git clone git://git.rocketboards.org/linux-socfpga.git
    cd linux-socfpga
    git checkout -b sockit ACDS13.1_REL_GSRD_PR

You will also need to download the Linaro ARM toolchain to get the C
cross-compiler. Find the latest  release tarball for your system 
[here](http://releases.linaro.org/latest/components/toolchain/binaries).
If you are on Linux, you are looking for the tarball named something like
"gcc-linaro-arm-linux-gnueabihf-*some-version-number*\_linux.tar.xz"

Extract the tarball anywhere on your system and
then add the "bin" subdirectory of the extracted folder to your path.
If you've done this properly, you should be able to run the following command.

    arm-linux-gnueabihf-gcc --version

Now that you have the cross-compiler, you can start building the kernel.
First, make sure to choose the correct configuration.

    make CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabihf- ARCH=arm socfpga_defconfig

You'll probably want to add an alias for the first part of the command to
your .bashrc or .zshrc. For instance, I have

    alias armmake='make CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabihf- ARCH=arm'

Now we can build the kernel image itself. To do this, you will first need
to install the U-boot "mkimage" tool. On Ubuntu and Debian, just install
the "uboot-mkimage" package. On Arch, install the "uboot-mkimage" package from
the [AUR](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/uboot-mkimage/).
The Linux kernel takes a long time to build. You can speed things up a bit
by using multiple threads. The command I use is...

    armmake -j4 uImage LOADADDR=0x8000

You should replace 4 with the number of cores you have on your computer.

You also need to build the device tree for the SoCKit board.

    armmake dtbs

Now that the kernel and device tree are built, you need to copy them onto the
boot partition. First, format the partition as FAT32 and mount it.

    sudo mkfs.vfat /dev/sdX1
    sudo mount /dev/sdX1 /mnt

If you don't have the `mkfs.vfat` program on your computer, you can probably
get it by installing the "dosfstools" package from your distribution's
package repository.

Then copy kernel and device tree onto the filesystem and unmount it.

    sudo cp arch/arm/boot/uImage /mnt
    sudo cp arch/arm/boot/dts/socfpga_cyclone5.dtb /mnt/socfpga.dtb
    sudo umount /mnt

## Step 5 - Installing the Root Filesystem

For our root filesystem, we will use [Buildroot](http://buildroot.uclibc.org/).
Buildroot is a set of buildscripts that can produce a Linux filesystem for an
embedded platform. First, download and extract the [tarball](http://buildroot.uclibc.org/downloads/buildroot-2013.11.tar.gz).
Go into the extracted folder and run `make menuconfig`. Here, you can configure
the filesystem image that Buildroot will produce. I suggest you choose the
following options.

First, go to "Target options" and set the following options

 * Target Architecture: ARM (little endian)
 * Target Architecture Variant: cortex-A9
 * Target ABI: EABIhf
 * Floating point strategy: VFPv2
 * ARM instruction set: ARM

Then, go to "Build Options" and change "Number of jobs to run simultaneously"
to the number of cores you have.

Go to "Toolchain" and do the following

 * Set "Toolchain path" to the folder you extracted the Linaro toolchain to
 * Set "Toolchain prefix" to "arm-linux-gnueabihf"
 * Change "External toolchain C library" to "glibc/eglibc"
 * Select "Toolchain has RPC support"
 * Select "Toolchain has C++ support"
 * Make sure "Enable MMU support" is selected

Go to "System configuration" and change the following.

 * Change the hostname, if you wish
 * Set a root password, if you prefer
 * Select "Run a getty after boot"
 * Go to "getty options"
    - Change the baudrate to 57600
 * Make sure "remount root filesystem during boot" is selected

Go to "Target packages" and select any extra packages you want.
I suggest you select "Package managers" -> "opkg". This will allow you to
install packages later if you want.

Go to "Filesystem images" and make sure "tar the root filesystem" is selected.

Save and exit menuconfig, then run `make` to build everything. If everything
works out, you will see the root filesystem image generated under
"output/images/rootfs.tar". You will need to untar this onto the root partition.

    sudo mkfs.ext3 /dev/sdX2
    sudo mount /dev/sdX2 /mnt
    sudo tar xf output/images/rootfs.tar -C /mnt

This will format the root partition and extract the files onto it.
Don't unmount the partition just yet, we'll need to add some more files.

*Note* - Recent releases of the linaro toolchain can cause an issue in which
`init` cannot find libc.so.6. If you get a problem like this, follow the
workarounds described in [this Github issue](https://github.com/zhemao/zhemao.github.com/issues/9).
To summarize, create symlinks on the partition from /lib to
/lib/arm-linux-gnueabihf and /usr/lib to /usr/lib/arm-linux-gnueabihf.
Running the following commands should do the trick.

    sudo ln -s /lib /mnt/lib/arm-linux-gnueabihf
    sudo ln -s /usr/lib /mnt/usr/lib/arm-linux-gnueabihf

## Step 6 - Install the kernel modules

The kernel has been installed on the boot partition, but you will also need to
build the kernel modules and install them on the root partition. Go back to
your kernel folder and run the following.

    armmake -j4 modules
    sudo make ARCH=arm INSTALL_MOD_PATH=/mnt modules_install
    sudo umount /mnt

Now, finally, your SD card is ready. You can now try booting it.
But to see what the OS is doing, you will need to use the serial port.

## Step 7 - Setup the serial port

You will use a USB serial connection to communicate with the board.
First, you should install "minicom", a serial terminal program for Linux.
Then, you'll have to configure minicom with the correct settings for the
SoCKit's serial line. To enter the configuration menu, run `sudo minicom -s`.
Go to "Serial port setup". Change the "Serial Device" to "/dev/ttyUSB0".
In the same submenu, open "Bps/Par/Bits". Set the speed to 57600. You will
probably have to hit "&lt;next&gt;" or "&lt;prev&gt;" a bunch of times.
Set parity to "None", data to 8, and stop bits to 1. In the end, "Current"
should be "57600 8N1". Go back to the "Serial port setup" menu and make sure
"Hardware Flow Control" and "Software Flow Control" are both off. Then exit
this menu by hitting enter and hit "Save setup as dfl", followed by
"Exit from minicom".

Now, plug your microSD card into the microSD slot on the board (it's on the
bottom underneath the push buttons). Plug the microUSB cable into the
USB UART port (it's the microUSB port farthest to the left), and connect it
to your computer. Press the red button to switch on the board and then run
"minicom" without arguments in your terminal. If you leave it for a while,
the kernel will start booting. If everything is successful, you will eventually
be presented with a login prompt.

If you hit some buttons when the board was first booting up, you may see a
prompt reading "SOCFPGA\_CYCLONE5". This is the U-boot console. To boot the
kernel, just type in "boot" and hit enter.

## Conclusion

Congrats, you just booted Linux on the SoCKit! If this is your first time
booting Linux on an ARM development board, this is actually a pretty major
accomplishment. You've now learned the general flow of how to get Linux
working on an embedded platform (excluding building and installing U-boot).
Next time, we'll look at how the CPU and FPGA can communicate.

[<- Part 1]({% post_url 2013-12-22-sockit-1 %})
[Part 3 ->]({% post_url 2013-12-27-sockit-3 %})
