---
title: EZ8 Soft Microcontroller
layout: default
category: project
---

EZ8 is an 8-bit processor architecture I designed to have a very
simple encoding. The goal was to make the hardware implementation very easy
and understandable. I implemented an EZ8 microcontroller in Verilog and ran it
on an Arrow SoCKit Cyclone V development board. 

## Architecture Overview

The EZ8 architecture has an 8-bit address space and datapath with 16-bit
instructions and a 12-bit instruction space. There is only one register,
which is an accumulator register. Computational instructions like add,
subtract, and bitwise operations take the accumulator and a memory address
as arguments. There are also immediate versions of these instructions which
take the accumulator and a literal as arguments.

The control flow instructions take the form of unconditional jumps,
like `goto`, `call`, `ret`, and `retint`, or conditional skip instructions,
which advance the program counter by +2 instead of +1 if a certain condition
is met. The `call` instruction is an unconditional jump which saves the
next instruction address on a stack before jumping. The `ret` instruction does
the inverse, popping an instruction off the stack and jumping to that
instruction. The EZ8's stack has space for 15 instructions.

## Microarchitecture Overview

The microarchitecture of the processor consists of a 3-stage in-order pipeline.
The stages of the pipeline are instruction decode, memory read / execute, and
memory writeback.

Here's a simplified block diagram.

<object type="image/svg+xml" data="/svg/ez8-pipeline.svg">EZ8</object>

The pipeline is mostly pretty straightforward. Bypassing the output of the
ALU to the input of the memory controller resolves read-after-write hazards
without having to stall or insert NOPs into the pipeline.

The most complicated logic is built into the program counter controller.
This unit resolves the control hazards that arise. It does this by sending
the kill instruction, which disables writeback to the data memory, effectively
turning a previously issued instruction into a NOP. If an instruction is an
unconditional jump, the controller is not aware of this until after instruction
decode, 1 cycle after issue. When an unconditional jump is detected, the
controller kills the instruction issued after the jump instruction and then
changes the program counter to the correct address. If a skip occurs, the
controller does not know of it until 2 cycles after issuing the instruction.
When a skip is detected, the controller kills the instruction after the skip
and then continues as normal.

## Functionality

The microcontroller can interface with simple peripherals like leds, keys,
switches, and a millisecond-precision timer through memory-mapped IO.
I was able to program the microcontroller onto the Cyclone V FPGA and run
an example program that swept LEDs back and forth either at regular intervals
or on the press of a button, depending on the setting of a switch.

I also implemented a software emulator and an assembler for EZ8 assembly.
The Verilog descriptions, software source code, and documentation can be found
on [Github](https://github.com/zhemao/ez8).
